I've just pinned out a piece of
watercolor paper here and I'm just going
to block in a painting the start of the
painting the bones of it and show you
how that process happens but we'll come
back in five minutes and I'll be halfway
through it so just blogged in really
really quickly roughly the shapes where
I want everything to go we'll let that
dry for five minutes I'll put a coat of
impasto gel or binder medium or
something like that
fascinating fixer over the top to lock
it all in and then I'll start building
all the highlights and shadows and
details so I've just reestablished all
these colors here again and I've just
put in some these dark areas but as you
can see these dark areas they're just be
black blobs in the middle of the
painting so what I've got to try and do
is create some depth and some dimension
in there I'm going to use the two
principles I talked about shadows in and
shadows on so we'll run some shadows on
the sand here and some shadows in the
foliage
so I'm putting my shadows on something
now and that's creating the plains of
the ground and by the way I paint them I
can create the impression of the ground
the shape of the ground and if you look
really closely in the background here
I'm doing some more shadows but I've
added actually some blue to that so it's
a little bit blue up if you look closer
and that creates the impression of these
shadows being further away so I'll make
them warmer and less blue in the
foreground here and keep them quite blue
out there and that will make look like
they're further away so I put my shadows
on here and that creates this plane here
now at this nice dark area in here but I
want to give it some depth so what I'm
going to do is I'm going to introduce
some color in there so that's just nice
kind of bluey green in color now create
some depth in the shadows like that
do the same over here and that creates
the illusion of the shadows receding off
all this that's and receding off in
underneath the trees so what I've done
too is I've put started to put the
highlights on the edges of these leaves
I'm not going to worry about that too
much now because I want to show you a
way of making these shadows giving
putting some depth in those shadows so
light filters through the trees so I'm
just going to use the edge of my brush
like that and create the impression that
lights coming through and hitting these
branches here and there like that
same over here because what I've done
here normally I would have painted all
the water and everything in but I'm
actually moving right here straight away
into that shaded area I'll come back and
get all that later because I want to
illustrate a few points so what we're
going to do now is I'm going to put some
flashes of color in the shadows just to
show how you can put unexpected color
too I want you to imagine that lights
filtering in through under those leaves
and it's reflecting the blue sky so we
put a few little flecks of blue in there
here and there I don't know if you can
see that like that there's always some
dead leaves a couple of branches light
hits something a weird way so there's a
little bit of orange there
like that lights filtered through the
trees and it's hitting a couple of
leaves here and there like that and of
course it's hitting some of that grass
growing underneath there that scraggly
stuff
like that of course that lovely white
sand here lights kind of filter through
the leaves and hit the sand in there
none of the trees but it's also going to
strike a branch every now and then on
the way through
just using the edge of the brush it's
going to hit some of that grass
and there we have it very very simple
but you can see here look shadows on
creating the shapes of the sand dunes
and I'll tidy that up a little bit later
on shadows in and I put flashes of color
in there to give them some depth and
dimension when I finish this painting
I'll tidy that all up properly but it
gives you the illusion of depth and
dimension and can show how much color
you can put into your shaded areas we've
got a bluish shadowy out here coming
through to a purple which flashes reds
and blues everything in there so anyway
there we have it just a very quick
explanation of the things that we've
written about on the explore acrylic
painting website that'll be a shadows
painting page there should be a few bits
and pieces I haven't covered here
hopefully between the two of those
things you can make some sense of this